---
title: 'Optech review of 2018 and plans for 2019'
permalink: /en/optech-review-2018-plan-2019/
name: 2018-12-28-optech-review-2018-plan-2019
type: posts
layout: post
lang: en
version: 1
---
This month, the [Optech team][optech team] met to review the progress that we
made in 2018 and make plans for 2019. We started Optech earlier this year
because we wanted to [help companies adopt scaling technologies and raise the
level of conversation around scaling Bitcoin][announcement]. This year, we’ve:

- Signed up 15 companies as members, including exchanges, custodians, wallets and merchants.
- Held [two workshops][workshops] to discuss scaling techniques with engineers
  from member companies. Almost all attendees thought the workshops were ‘good’
  or ‘excellent’, with an average score of 3.7/5 for the first and 4.2/5 for the
  second.
- Produced 1 pilot and 26 regular
  [newsletters][]. If all the newsletters to date were printed out on typical
  book pages, they'd be over 100 pages long (36,000 words at 350 words per
  page). Over 1,800 Bitcoin engineers and enthusiasts have subscribed to the
  newsletter.
- Built a [dashboard][] to track the state of the Bitcoin network and the
  adoption rate of scaling technologies. Marcin wrote about the [building the
  dashboard in an Optech blog post][dashboard blog post].
- Started writing the first chapter of our [Scaling Book][scaling book].

We think that’s a good start, and we’re all proud of what Optech has done so
far, but we want to do even more next year. Optech's mission has not changed
for 2019. We remain focused on helping companies adopt Bitcoin scaling
technologies. Our high-level goals for next year are:

1. Hold two workshops, maintaining the high standard of the previous two.
   Following our recent workshop in Europe, we’re provisionally planning a US
  East Coast workshop in the first half of 2019 and US West Coast in the second
  half of 2019.
1. Make significant progress on the Scaling Book. We want to complete the [fee
   bumping chapter][scaling book feebumping] and several more chapters, and
  have multiple contributors to future chapters.
1. Publish six more field reports from engineers at member companies that
   describe their experience implementing scaling techniques. We all really
   enjoyed AJ Towns’s field report on UTXO consolidation in [Newsletter #6][],
   and would love to see more reports.
1. Add at least six more members in 2019. There are still a few large exchanges
   that haven’t become members yet and we’d love to reach them.
1. Publish a ‘compatibility matrix’ showing different wallets’ and exchanges’
   support for scaling technologies. Mike has already been working on
   documenting wallet and exchange compatibility with RBF and we plan to publish
   that work on our website in early 2019.

There are a few other areas we think we can help:

- We want our newsletter to reach more people who don’t necessarily speak
  English, particularly in China, Japan and Korea. If you’re a subscriber and
  would like to help translating the newsletter, let us know!
- As we move towards formalization and possible implementation of a
  [Schnorr/Taproot softfork][softfork], we want to help our member companies
  and other Bitcoin organizations prepare for the change. We think we can help
  with soliciting industry input to the specification and building docs and tools
  to help early adopters.

Thank you to all of our sponsors, members and subscribers for your support this
year! It really does mean a lot to us. As always, please [contact us][optech
email] if you’d like to get involved, and let us know if you have any
suggestions for how we can help companies adopt best practice and help Bitcoin
scale.

{% include references.md %}

[optech team]: https://bitcoinops.org/about/
[announcement]: https://bitcoinops.org/en/announcing-bitcoin-optech/
[workshops]: https://bitcoinops.org/workshops/
[newsletters]: https://bitcoinops.org/en/newsletters/
[dashboard]: https://dashboard.bitcoinops.org/
[dashboard blog post]: https://bitcoinops.org/en/dashboard-announcement/
[scaling book]: https://github.com/bitcoinops/scaling-book
[scaling book feebumping]: https://github.com/bitcoinops/scaling-book/blob/master/1.fee_bumping/fee_bumping.md
[softfork]: https://bitcoinops.org/en/newsletters/2018/12/18/#news
