---
title: "New Optech Podcast"
permalink: /en/podcast-announcement/
name: 2023-03-08-podcast-announcement
type: posts
layout: post
lang: en
slug: 2023-03-08-podcast-announcement

excerpt: >
  Announcement of a new Optech podcast based on the weekly Optech Audio
  Recap hosted on Twitter Spaces.

---
Since July 2022, Optech contributors Mike Schmidt and Mark "Murch" Erhardt
have been joined on Twitter Spaces by members of the community and
leading Bitcoin and LN protocol developers to discuss the events
summarized in each week's Optech Newsletter.  Each of those discussions
will now be available as episodes on [all major podcast platforms][podcast
index].

Each episode will also be available as a page on the Optech website with
a summary of the episode content and a complete transcript.  We think
this is a major advance in Optech's mission to improve communication
between open source projects and downstream users and businesses.

Anyone who wants to keep track of Bitcoin and LN protocol development
can subscribe to either the newsletter (if they like reading) or the
podcast (if they prefer listening).  If they discover a topic through
the newsletter that they want to know more about, they can find out what
experienced Bitcoin contributors are saying about the topic by listening
to the podcast episode or reading its transcript.  Or, if they first
hear about an interesting topic through the podcast, they can use that
week's newsletter to immediately find the original discussions on a
mailing list or pull request.

To make it easy to move between the newsletter and the podcast, both
sources are cross-indexed to each other.  With one click at the end of a
newsletter item, you'll be taken to the corresponding item on a podcast
episode.  From there, you can immediately jump to that part of the audio
episode or the transcript.  From the summary at the top of each podcast
page, each item links directly to the part of the original newsletter it
describes.

Years from now, users, developers, and researchers will be able to look
up a subject in Optech's extensive [topic index][], choose a particular
item of interest, review a brief summary of the event in the newsletter,
and then hear or read contemporary discussion about the subject from
users and experts---often including the experts who contributed the most
to that subject and the users who felt the most strongly about it.

Of course, the podcast audio and transcripts, like all Optech content,
is available under an open source license.

New podcast episodes will be released a few days after the conclusion of
a Twitter Spaces to allow for professional post production of the audio.
Transcripts will be published a few days after that.  In addition to
publishing new episodes as soon as they're complete, Optech's audio and
transcription teams will gradually be publishing old episodes.

If you're interested in Bitcoin technology, we encourage you to
subscribe to the podcast and consider joining us each week for a new
recap on Twitter Spaces.

{% include references.md %}
[topic index]: /en/topics/
[podcast index]: /en/podcast/
