---
title: 'Bitcoin Optech Newsletter #136'
permalink: /en/newsletters/2021/02/17/
name: 2021-02-17-newsletter
slug: 2021-02-17-newsletter
type: newsletter
layout: newsletter
lang: en
---
This week's newsletter describes the development of a new constant-time algorithm for
generating and verifying transaction signatures, mentions a proposal to
stop processing unsolicited transactions, summarizes a proposed BIP for
setting up multisig wallets, shares insight from a discussion about
managing escrows over LN, links to renewed discussion about
bidirectional upfront LN fees, and mentions a new protocol for
mitigating the risk of malicious hardware wallets.  Also included are
our regular sections with news about updated clients and services,
announcements of new software releases and release candidates, and
descriptions of notable changes in popular Bitcoin infrastructure
software.

## News

- **Faster signature operations:** Russell O'Connor and Andrew Poelstra
  published a [blog post][safegcd bounds] announcing the implementation
  of an algorithm that can speed up Bitcoin Core's signature
  verification by 15%.  It can also reduce by 25% the amount of time it
  takes to generate signatures while still using a constant-time
  algorithm that reduces the risk of sidechannel data leaks, which may
  be of special interest to hardware wallet developers whose devices
  have limited resources.

    The blog post describes the development of the new algorithm by
    Daniel J. Bernstein and Bo-Yin Yang, an implementation of it for
    libsecp256k1 by Peter Dettman (mentioned in [Newsletter
    #111][news111 secp767]), a novel and CPU-efficient method by Pieter
    Wuille for computing the maximum number of steps the algorithm
    requires to achieve its goal in constant time, a variation on
    Bernstein's and Yang's algorithm by Gregory Maxwell that's even more
    efficient, and the implementation of Wuille's bound verification
    program in the Coq proof assistant by O'Connor and Poelstra to help
    ensure its correctness.  Dettman's original implementation for
    libsecp256k1 has been updated with the recent developments by Wuille
    as [PR #831][libsecp256k1 #831].

- **Proposal to stop processing unsolicited transactions:** normally
  nodes expect to receive the announcement of a new transaction in a P2P
  protocol `inv` message.  If the node is interested in the transaction
  (e.g. it hasn't previously received it from another peer), it requests
  the transaction using a `getdata` message and the broadcaster replies with the
  transaction in a `tx` message.  However, for almost a decade, some
  light clients and other software have skipped the `inv` and `getdata`
  steps and proceed to just send unsolicited `tx` messages
  ([example][bitcoinj unsolicited]).

    This week, Antoine Riard [posted][riard post] to the Bitcoin-Dev
    mailing list a proposal to stop processing such unsolicited `tx`
    messages.  As discussed in a [Bitcoin Core PR][Bitcoin Core #20277],
    this will give a node more control over when it receives and
    processes transactions, giving it an additional way to limit the
    impact of peers that send expensive-to-validate transactions.  Riard
    is proposing this change be made possibly as early as the next major
    version of Bitcoin Core, version 22.0.

    The downside of this approach is that all clients that currently
    send unsolicited `tx` messages won't be able to send transactions
    unless they are upgraded before the last few 0.21.x or earlier
    versions of Bitcoin Core leave the network (or other Bitcoin
    implementations that act similarly).  It usually takes several years
    for an old version to completely leave the network, so there should
    be plenty of time to accomplish client upgrades.  We encourage the
    developers of affected clients to read the proposal and consider
    commenting on it.

- **Securely setting up multisig wallets:** Hugo Nguyen [posted][nguyen
  post] to the Bitcoin-Dev mailing list a draft BIP that describes how
  wallets, particularly hardware wallets, can securely exchange the
  information necessary to become signers for a multisig wallet.  The
  information that needs to be exchanged includes the script template to
  use (e.g.  P2WSH with 2-of-3 keys required to sign) and each signer's
  [BIP32][] extended public key (xpub) at the key path it plans to use
  for signing.

    Briefly, Nguyen's proposal (developed in correspondence with several
    hardware wallet producers) has a coordinator initiate the multisig
    federation process by choosing a script template and generating a
    private encryption and authentication credential.  Those parameters
    are shared with the member wallets, who choose an appropriate key
    path and return its xpub along with a signature generated by its
    corresponding private key.  The set of {identifying_parameters,
    key_path, xpub, signature} are encrypted and returned to the
    coordinator by each wallet.  The coordinator then combines them into
    an [output script descriptor][topic descriptors] that is encrypted
    and passed back to each member wallet, who verifies their xpub is
    included and then stores the descriptor as a script template they're
    willing to sign for.

    The proposal received a significant amount of discussion on the mailing list,
    and some changes are planned.  We'll monitor the discussion for
    significant updates as the proposal matures and gets closer to
    implementation.

- **Escrow over LN:** a discussion [started][zmn escrow1] on the
  Lightning-Dev mailing over a year ago about creating non-custodial
  onchain escrows for LN saw [renewed discussion][aragoneses escrow]
  this past week.  A particular standout in the discussion was a
  [post][zmn escrow2] by ZmnSCPxj that uses one of [De Morgan's laws][]
  for boolean statements to greatly simplify the construction of
  escrows---and [possibly][kohen escrow] many other LN-based
  contracts---with the tradeoff of requiring a seller to post a bond
  before receiving payment.  ZmnSCPxj's idea requires an upgrade of LN to
  use [PTLCs][topic ptlc], which is not currently expected until after
  [taproot][topic taproot] activates.

- **Renewed discussion about bidirectional upfront LN fees:**  Joost
  Jager [restarted][jager hold fees] Lightning-Dev mailing list
  discussion about adding LN service fees that charge spenders and
  receivers for the time they consume using a channel's limited
  availability of funding ("liquidity") and concurrent payment capacity
  ("HTLC slots").  Jager builds on a previous proposal (see [Newsletter
  #122][news122 bidir]), extending its fixed fees with fees
  proportional to payment processing duration ("hold fees").  The
  proposal received moderate discussion, with one [concern][zmn hold fee
  privacy] being a reduction in sender/receiver privacy.  The underlying
  issue here has been [known][russell loop] for five years and discussed
  at length many times, so we expect discussion to continue.

- **Anti-exfiltration:** Andrew Poelstra and Jonas Nick published a blog
  [post][anti-exfil] about a security technique being implemented for
  the Shift Crypto [BitBox02][] and Blockstream [Jade][] hardware wallets.  The
  goal is to allow both a hardware wallet and the computer controlling
  it to each be assured that the nonce used to generate a signature is
  actually an unguessable value.  This prevents malicious hardware
  wallet firmware from generating nonces known to the firmware author,
  which the author could combine with one of the device's transaction signatures found onchain to
  derive its private keys, allowing them to spend any other bitcoins
  controlled by those keys.  The post describes the technique used,
  which was previously mentioned in a mailing list thread about this
  subject almost a year ago (see Newsletters [#87][news87 exfil] and
  [#88][news88 exfil]).

## Changes to services and client software

*In this monthly feature, we highlight interesting updates to Bitcoin
wallets and services.*

- **Blockstream announces LNsync:**
  [LNsync][blockstream blog lnsync] allows Lightning wallets that were
  offline for a while to quickly download recent updates to LN topology in
  order to optimally route a payment to its destination. An open
  source plugin, [historian][github historian], provides this functionality for
  C-Lightning users.

- **Rust light client Nakamoto released:**
  Alexis Sellier released [Nakamoto][nakamoto blog], a "high-assurance Bitcoin
  light-client implementation in Rust, with a focus on low resource utilization,
  modularity and security" based on [compact block filters][topic compact block filters].

- **Blockstream Satellite broadcasting LN data and Bitcoin Core source:**
  Blockstream's Satellite, in addition to broadcasting Bitcoin block chain data,
  now includes the [Bitcoin Core source code][blockstream satellite bitcoin
  code], code for a satellite-optimized Bitcoin fork ([Bitcoin
  Satellite][github bitcoin satellite]), and [LN gossip data][blockstream
  satellite ln data].

- **Blockstream Green implements CSV:**
  Green Wallet previously used nLockTime as a wallet recovery mechanism,
  requiring users to receive backup emails with pre-signed transactions from
  Blockstream after each transaction in order to recover funds. By [implementing
  an `OP_CHECKSEQUENCEVERIFY` (CSV) recovery mechanism][blockstream green csv],
  wallets can now be recovered without needing transaction-specific backup files or
  associating an email address with the wallet.

- **Muun 2.0 released:**
  The [2.0 release][muun 2.0 blog] of mobile Bitcoin and Lightning wallet Muun
  includes multisig, wallet recovery features, and also open sources the Android
  and iOS mobile apps.

- **Joinmarket 0.8.1 released:**
  The [0.8.1 release][joinmarket 0.8.1] contains additional [PSBT][topic psbt]
  support for PSBTs created externally, [signet][topic signet] support, and a fix
  for uppercase address support with [BIP21][] URIs (see [Newsletter #127][news127 bech32 casing]). A terminal-based UI
  for JoinMarket, [JoininBox][github joininbox], was also updated to support 0.8.1.

- **VBTC allows withdrawals via LN and segwit batches:**
  VBTC, a Vietnamese exchange, [added a batched segwit withdrawal option][vbtc blog
  segwit] after recently also [enabling Lightning withdrawals][vbtc blog
  lightning]. The incentivized segwit batch withdrawal occurs once a week,
  targeting a time when mempools are less likely to have large transaction backlogs.

- **Bitcoin Dev Kit v0.3.0 released:**
  Rust wallet library Bitcoin Dev Kit announced its [v0.3.0 release][bdk
  0.3.0 blog] including splitting out the CLI into its own repository. The
  recent [BDK v0.2.0][bdk 0.2.0 blog] release added Branch and Bound (BnB) coin selection,
  [descriptor][topic descriptors] templates (including with the recently added
  `sortedmulti`), and more.

## Releases and release candidates

*New releases and release candidates for popular Bitcoin infrastructure
projects.  Please consider upgrading to new releases or helping to test
release candidates.*

- [LND 0.12.1-beta.rc1][] is a release candidate for a maintenance
  release of LND.  It fixes an edge case that could lead to accidental
  channel closure and a bug that could cause some payments to fail
  unnecessarily, plus some other minor improvements and bug fixes.

## Notable code and documentation changes

*Notable changes this week in [Bitcoin Core][bitcoin core repo],
[C-Lightning][c-lightning repo], [Eclair][eclair repo], [LND][lnd repo],
[Rust-Lightning][rust-lightning repo], [libsecp256k1][libsecp256k1
repo], [Hardware Wallet Interface (HWI)][hwi repo],
[Rust Bitcoin][rust bitcoin repo], [BTCPay Server][btcpay server repo],
[Bitcoin Improvement Proposals (BIPs)][bips repo], and [Lightning
BOLTs][bolts repo].*

- [Bitcoin Core #20944][] adds a new `total_fee` field to the object returned
  by the `getmempoolinfo` RPC and the `mempool/info` REST endpoint. `total_fee`
  indicates the sum of the transaction fees for all transactions currently in the
  mempool.

- [LND #4909][] adds new `getmccfg` and `setmccfg` RPCs that can,
  respectively, retrieve and temporarily change settings in LND's
  *mission control* subsystem without restarting the daemon.  Mission
  control uses information about past payment attempts to choose better
  routes for subsequent payment attempts.

- [Rust-Lightning #787][] ensures that channel closures due to error messages
  only happen when the peer who sent the message is the channel's counterparty.
  Previously, it was possible for malicious peers to force-close any channel if
  they knew the channel id.

- [BTCPay Server #2164][] redesigns the wallet setup wizard, walking the user
  through setting up BTCPay's internal wallet and optionally integrating
  it with the user's own remote software or hardware wallet.  This is
  the start of other redesign work on BTCPay's interface.

- [HWI #443][] adds support for signing multisig inputs with the
  BitBox02 hardware wallet.

- [Bitcoin Core #19145][] extends the `gettxoutsetinfo` RPC's
  `hash_type` option to accept a new `muhash` parameter that will
  produce the [MuHash3072][] digest of the UTXO set at the current block
  height.  This is an alternative to producing the default SHA256 digest of
  the UTXO set.  When run this way, MuHash has to process the same
  amount as data as the SHA256 function, so there's not expected to be
  any significant change in performance of the `gettxoutsetinfo` RPC,
  which can take up to several minutes to return on slow single-board
  computers.  However, a previously calculated MuHash object can have
  elements added or removed from it relatively cheaply, so a future PR
  is expected to quickly calculate a MuHash summary of the UTXO set at
  each block, save those summaries in a simple database, and allow
  returning them in digest form almost instantly upon demand.  This will also benefit
  the [AssumeUTXO][topic assumeutxo] project, which relies on the
  ability of users to compare UTXO set hashes at selected past block
  heights.

- [C-Lightning #4364][] changes how it notifies its channel partners
  about problems, separating existing error messages into true *errors*
  and those that are just *warnings*.  The current [BOLT1][]
  specification requires that any error result in channels being closed
  (although this does not seem to be universally implemented), but a
  [proposed specification update][bolts #834] introduces the warning
  message type that can allow for a more flexible response.  Anyone
  interested may also wish to read a [post][kirk-cohen post] to the
  Lightning-Dev mailing list this week by Carla Kirk-Cohen about
  extended error message descriptions, a topic she described as
  "related, but not directly relevant to a soft warning error."

{% include references.md %}
{% include linkers/issues.md issues="20944,4909,787,2164,443,19145,4364,834,831,20277" %}
[LND 0.12.1-beta.rc1]: https://github.com/lightningnetwork/lnd/releases/tag/v0.12.1-beta.rc1
[safegcd bounds]: https://medium.com/blockstream/a-formal-proof-of-safegcd-bounds-695e1735a348
[bitcoinj unsolicited]: https://github.com/bitcoinj/bitcoinj/blob/7d2d8d7792ec5f4ce07ff82980b4e723993221e8/core/src/main/java/org/bitcoinj/core/TransactionBroadcast.java#L145
[de morgan's laws]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/De_Morgan's_laws
[btcmag demo]: https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/good-griefing-a-lingering-vulnerability-on-lightning-network-that-still-needs-fixing
[anti-exfil]: https://medium.com/blockstream/anti-exfil-stopping-key-exfiltration-589f02facc2e
[news111 secp767]: /en/newsletters/2020/08/19/#proposed-uniform-tiebreaker-in-schnorr-signatures
[riard post]: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2021-February/018391.html
[nguyen post]: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2021-February/018385.html
[zmn escrow1]: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2019-June/002028.html
[aragoneses escrow]: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2021-February/002948.html
[zmn escrow2]: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2021-February/002955.html
[kohen escrow]: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2021-February/002970.html
[jager hold fees]: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2021-February/002958.html
[news122 bidir]: /en/newsletters/2020/11/04/#bi-directional-upfront-fees-for-ln
[zmn hold fee privacy]: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2021-February/002967.html
[russell loop]: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2015-August/000135.html
[bitbox02]: https://shiftcrypto.ch/bitbox02/
[jade]: https://blockstream.com/jade/
[news87 exfil]: /en/newsletters/2020/03/04/#proposal-to-standardize-an-exfiltration-resistant-nonce-protocol
[news88 exfil]: /en/newsletters/2020/03/11/#exfiltration-resistant-nonce-protocols
[muhash3072]: /en/newsletters/2021/01/13/#bitcoin-core-19055
[kirk-cohen post]: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/lightning-dev/2021-February/002964.html
[blockstream blog lnsync]: https://blockstream.com/2021/01/22/en-lnsync-getting-your-lightning-node-up-to-speed-quickly/
[github historian]: https://github.com/lightningd/plugins/tree/master/historian
[nakamoto blog]: https://cloudhead.io/nakamoto/
[blockstream satellite bitcoin code]: https://blockstream.com/2021/02/02/en-blockstream-provides-backup-satellite-broadcast-for-bitcoin-core-source-code/
[github bitcoin satellite]: https://github.com/Blockstream/bitcoinsatellite
[blockstream satellite ln data]: https://blockstream.com/2021/01/29/en-new-blockstream-satellite-updates/
[blockstream green csv]: https://blockstream.com/2021/01/25/en-blockstream-green-bitcoin-wallets-now-using-checksequenceverify-timelocks/
[muun 2.0 blog]: https://medium.com/muunwallet/announcing-muun-2-0-d61b0844dc0a
[joinmarket 0.8.1]: https://github.com/JoinMarket-Org/joinmarket-clientserver/blob/master/docs/release-notes/release-notes-0.8.1.md
[news127 bech32 casing]: /en/newsletters/2020/12/09/#thwarted-upgrade-to-uppercase-bech32-qr-codes
[github joininbox]: https://github.com/openoms/joininbox
[vbtc blog segwit]: https://blog.vbtc.exchange/2021/batched-segwit-withdrawals-tutorial-5
[vbtc blog lightning]: https://blog.vbtc.exchange/2020/how-to-withdraw-bitcoin-lightning-network-tutorial-3
[bdk 0.3.0 blog]: https://bitcoindevkit.org/blog/2021/01/release-v0.3.0/
[bdk 0.2.0 blog]: https://bitcoindevkit.org/blog/2020/12/release-v0.2.0/
